If my poor Flatland friend retained the vigour of mind which he enjoyed
when he began to compose these Memoirs, I should not now need to
represent him in this preface, in which he desires, firstly, to return
his thanks to his readers and critics in Spaceland, whose appreciation
has, with unexpected celerity, required a second edition of his work;
secondly, to apologize for certain errors and misprints (for which,
however, he is not entirely responsible); and, thirdly, to explain one
or two misconceptions.  But he is not the Square he once was.  Years of
imprisonment, and the still heavier burden of general incredulity and
mockery, have combined with the natural decay of old age to erase from
his mind many of the thoughts and notions, and much also of the
terminology, which he acquired during his short stay in Spaceland.  He
has, therefore, requested me to reply in his behalf to two special
objections, one of an intellectual, the other of a moral nature.

The first objection is, that a Flatlander, seeing a Line, sees
something that must be THICK to the eye as well as LONG to the eye
(otherwise it would not be visible, if it had not some thickness); and
consequently he ought (it is argued) to acknowledge that his countrymen
are not only long and broad, but also (though doubtless in a very
slight degree) THICK or HIGH.  This objection is plausible, and, to
Spacelanders, almost irresistible, so that, I confess, when I first
heard it, I knew not what to reply.  But my poor old friend's answer
appears to me completely to meet it.