Section 7.  Concerning Irregular Figures



Throughout the previous pages I have been assuming--what perhaps should
have been laid down at the beginning as a distinct and fundamental
proposition--that every human being in Flatland is a Regular Figure,
that is to say of regular construction.  By this I mean that a Woman
must not only be a line, but a straight line; that an Artisan or
Soldier must have two of his sides equal; that Tradesmen must have
three sides equal; Lawyers (of which class I am a humble member), four
sides equal, and generally, that in every Polygon, all the sides must
be equal.

The size of the sides would of course depend upon the age of the
individual.  A Female at birth would be about an inch long, while a
tall adult Woman might extend to a foot.  As to the Males of every
class, it may be roughly said that the length of an adult's sides, when
added together, is two feet or a little more.  But the size of our
sides is not under consideration.  I am speaking of the EQUALITY of
sides, and it does not need much reflection to see that the whole of
the social life in Flatland rests upon the fundamental fact that Nature
wills all Figures to have their sides equal.

If our sides were unequal our angles might be unequal.  Instead of its
being sufficient to feel, or estimate by sight, a single angle in order
to determine the form of an individual, it would be necessary to
ascertain each angle by the experiment of Feeling.  But life would be
too short for such a tedious grouping.  The whole science and art of
Sight Recognition would at once perish; Feeling, so far as it is an
art, would not long survive; intercourse would become perilous or
impossible; there would be an end to all confidence, all forethought;
no one would be safe in making the most simple social arrangements; in
a word, civilization would relapse into barbarism.

Am I going too fast to carry my Readers with me to these obvious
conclusions?  Surely a moment's reflection, and a single instance from
common life, must convince every one that our whole social system is
based upon Regularity, or Equality of Angles.  You meet, for example,
two or three Tradesmen in the street, whom you recognize at once to be
Tradesmen by a glance at their angles and rapidly bedimmed sides, and
you ask them to step into your house to lunch.  This you do at present
with perfect confidence, because everyone knows to an inch or two the
area occupied by an adult Triangle:  but imagine that your Tradesman
drags behind his regular and respectable vertex, a parallelogram of
twelve or thirteen inches in diagonal:--what are you to do with such a
monster sticking fast in your house door?

But I am insulting the intelligence of my Readers by accumulating
details which must be patent to everyone who enjoys the advantages of a
Residence in Spaceland.  Obviously the measurements of a single angle
would no longer be sufficient under such portentous circumstances;
one's whole life would be taken up in feeling or surveying the
perimeter of one's acquaintances.  Already the difficulties of avoiding
a collision in a crowd are enough to tax the sagacity of even a
well-educated Square; but if no one could calculate the Regularity of a
single figure in the company, all would be chaos and confusion, and the
slightest panic would cause serious injuries, or--if there happened to
be any Women or Soldiers present--perhaps considerable loss of life.

Expediency therefore concurs with Nature in stamping the seal of its
approval upon Regularity of conformation:  nor has the Law been
backward in seconding their efforts.  "Irregularity of Figure" means
with us the same as, or more than, a combination of moral obliquity and
criminality with you, and is treated accordingly.  There are not
wanting, it is true, some promulgators of paradoxes who maintain that
there is no necessary connection between geometrical and moral
Irregularity.  "The Irregular", they say, "is from his birth scouted by
his own parents, derided by his brothers and sisters, neglected by the
domestics, scorned and suspected by society, and excluded from all
posts of responsibility, trust, and useful activity.  His every
movement is jealously watched by the police till he comes of age and
presents himself for inspection; then he is either destroyed, if he is
found to exceed the fixed margin of deviation, or else immured in a
Government Office as a clerk of the seventh class; prevented from
marriage; forced to drudge at an uninteresting occupation for a
miserable stipend; obliged to live and board at the office, and to take
even his vacation under close supervision; what wonder that human
nature, even in the best and purest, is embittered and perverted by
such surroundings!"

All this very plausible reasoning does not convince me, as it has not
convinced the wisest of our Statesmen, that our ancestors erred in
laying it down as an axiom of policy that the toleration of
Irregularity is incompatible with the safety of the State.  Doubtless,
the life of an Irregular is hard; but the interests of the Greater
Number require that it shall be hard.  If a man with a triangular front
and a polygonal back were allowed to exist and to propagate a still
more Irregular posterity, what would become of the arts of life?  Are
the houses and doors and churches in Flatland to be altered in order to
accommodate such monsters?  Are our ticket-collectors to be required to
measure every man's perimeter before they allow him to enter a theatre
or to take his place in a lecture room?  Is an Irregular to be exempted
from the militia?  And if not, how is he to be prevented from carrying
desolation into the ranks of his comrades?  Again, what irresistible
temptations to fraudulent impostures must needs beset such a creature!
How easy for him to enter a shop with his polygonal front foremost, and
to order goods to any extent from a confiding tradesman!  Let the
advocates of a falsely called Philanthropy plead as they may for the
abrogation of the Irregular Penal Laws, I for my part have never known
an Irregular who was not also what Nature evidently intended him to
be--a hypocrite, a misanthropist, and, up to the limits of his power, a
perpetrator of all manner of mischief.

Not that I should be disposed to recommend (at present) the extreme
measures adopted by some States, where an infant whose angle deviates
by half a degree from the correct angularity is summarily destroyed at
birth.  Some of our highest and ablest men, men of real genius, have
during their earliest days laboured under deviations as great as, or
even greater than, forty-five minutes: and the loss of their precious
lives would have been an irreparable injury to the State.  The art of
healing also has achieved some of its most glorious triumphs in the
compressions, extensions, trepannings, colligations, and other surgical
or diaetetic operations by which Irregularity has been partly or wholly
cured.  Advocating therefore a VIA MEDIA, I would lay down no fixed or
absolute line of demarcation; but at the period when the frame is just
beginning to set, and when the Medical Board has reported that recovery
is improbable, I would suggest that the Irregular offspring be
painlessly and mercifully consumed.




Section 8.  Of the Ancient Practice of Painting



If my Readers have followed me with any attention up to this point,
they will not be surprised to hear that life is somewhat dull in
Flatland.  I do not, of course, mean that there are not battles,
conspiracies, tumults, factions, and all those other phenomena which
are supposed to make History interesting; nor would I deny that the
strange mixture of the problems of life and the problems of
Mathematics, continually inducing conjecture and giving the opportunity
of immediate verification, imparts to our existence a zest which you in
Spaceland can hardly comprehend.  I speak now from the aesthetic and
artistic point of view when I say that life with us is dull;
aesthetically and artistically, very dull indeed.

How can it be otherwise, when all one's prospect, all one's landscapes,
historical pieces, portraits, flowers, still life, are nothing but a
single line, with no varieties except degrees of brightness and
obscurity?

It was not always thus.  Colour, if Tradition speaks the truth, once
for the space of half a dozen centuries or more, threw a transient
splendour over the lives of our ancestors in the remotest ages.  Some
private individual--a Pentagon whose name is variously reported--having
casually discovered the constituents of the simpler colours and a
rudimentary method of painting, is said to have begun decorating first
his house, then his slaves, then his Father, his Sons, and Grandsons,
lastly himself.  The convenience as well as the beauty of the results
commended themselves to all.  Wherever Chromatistes,--for by that name
the most trustworthy authorities concur in calling him,--turned his
variegated frame, there he at once excited attention, and attracted
respect.  No one now needed to "feel" him; no one mistook his front for
his back; all his movements were readily ascertained by his neighbours
without the slightest strain on their powers of calculation; no one
jostled him, or failed to make way for him; his voice was saved the
labour of that exhausting utterance by which we colourless Squares and
Pentagons are often forced to proclaim our individuality when we move
amid a crowd of ignorant Isosceles.

The fashion spread like wildfire.  Before a week was over, every Square
and Triangle in the district had copied the example of Chromatistes,
and only a few of the more conservative Pentagons still held out.  A
month or two found even the Dodecagons infected with the innovation.  A
year had not elapsed before the habit had spread to all but the very
highest of the Nobility.  Needless to say, the custom soon made its way
from the district of Chromatistes to surrounding regions; and within
two generations no one in all Flatland was colourless except the Women
and the Priests.

Here Nature herself appeared to erect a barrier, and to plead against
extending the innovation to these two classes.  Many-sidedness was
almost essential as a pretext for the Innovators.  "Distinction of
sides is intended by Nature to imply distinction of colours"--such was
the sophism which in those days flew from mouth to mouth, converting
whole towns at a time to the new culture.  But manifestly to our
Priests and Women this adage did not apply.  The latter had only one
side, and therefore--plurally and pedantically speaking--NO SIDES.  The
former--if at least they would assert their claim to be really and
truly Circles, and not mere high-class Polygons with an infinitely
large number of infinitesimally small sides--were in the habit of
boasting (what Women confessed and deplored) that they also had no
sides, being blessed with a perimeter of one line, or, in other words,
a Circumference.  Hence it came to pass that these two Classes could
see no force in the so-called axiom about "Distinction of Sides
implying Distinction of Colour"; and when all others had succumbed to
the fascinations of corporal decoration, the Priests and the Women
alone still remained pure from the pollution of paint.

Immoral, licentious, anarchical, unscientific--call them by what names
you will--yet, from an aesthetic point of view, those ancient days of
the Colour Revolt were the glorious childhood of Art in Flatland--a
childhood, alas, that never ripened into manhood, nor even reached the
blossom of youth.  To live was then in itself a delight, because living
implied seeing.  Even at a small party, the company was a pleasure to
behold; the richly varied hues of the assembly in a church or theatre
are said to have more than once proved too distracting for our greatest
teachers and actors; but most ravishing of all is said to have been the
unspeakable magnificence of a military review.

The sight of a line of battle of twenty thousand Isosceles suddenly
facing about, and exchanging the sombre black of their bases for the
orange and purple of the two sides including their acute angle; the
militia of the Equilateral Triangles tricoloured in red, white, and
blue; the mauve, ultra-marine, gamboge, and burnt umber of the Square
artillerymen rapidly rotating near their vermilion guns; the dashing
and flashing of the five-coloured and six-coloured Pentagons and
Hexagons careering across the field in their offices of surgeons,
geometricians and aides-de-camp--all these may well have been
sufficient to render credible the famous story how an illustrious
Circle, overcome by the artistic beauty of the forces under his
command, threw aside his marshal's baton and his royal crown,
exclaiming that he henceforth exchanged them for the artist's pencil.
How great and glorious the sensuous development of these days must have
been is in part indicated by the very language and vocabulary of the
period.  The commonest utterances of the commonest citizens in the time
of the Colour Revolt seem to have been suffused with a richer tinge of
word or thought; and to that era we are even now indebted for our
finest poetry and for whatever rhythm still remains in the more
scientific utterance of these modern days.
